Public statistics on crime are increasingly being made available worldwide to the benefit of researchers and the public alike. However, the potential stigmatising effect of crime statistics has led to resistance to publication. For instance, in our case, street-level crime maps are publicly available online in England and Wales. However, there was initial resistance to publishing such fine-grained crime statistics, which can lower house prices and increase insurance premiums in high crime neighbourhoods (which are disproportionately in disadvantaged areas). Identifying the causal effect of public crime statistics is difficult since crime statistics generally mirror actual crime. The task is akin to distinguishing between a person and their reflection. However, we have spotted a (un)natural experiment that occurs due to the production of the England and Wales' crime maps that would allows us to estimate causal effects. This is due to the data anonymisation process used by the statistical body, which causes a mismatch between what the public ‘sees’ and the true level of crime in an area.

This is a study protocol where we formally outline our hypothesis and data analysis plans before extracting the secondary data sources. For research question one, we intentionally not extracted the full public domain data on UK house prices to blind ourselves to the final results. We have also included our accidental discoveries in our supplementary materials and have not changed our hypotheses to reflect our knowledge. For research question two, we have not extracted the police force data yet and we will prevent the house price data (i.e. outcomes) from entering the police safe setting until this peer review of the protocol is complete. We have pre-registered the study on OSF (including a non-peer reviewed copy of this protocol). We have tried to adhere to OSF’s recommendations for secondary data protocols.

While there have been numerous studies looking at the effects of crime on house prices, with varying degrees of credibility based on their causal design, no study has measured the impact of public statistics on house prices. Furthermore, we know of no studies in this area that have developed a study protocol prior to analysis of the data to prevent post diction, data mining etc. We also believe that our research design is interesting in it’s own right and pioneers the possibility of using intentional errors in public map data (e.g. due to anonymisation) in causal designs.

We have no prior interaction with PLOSone and have indicated appropriate editors in our submission form. We have no opposed reviewers.
